So let's talk about creating
and using subclasses and superclasses.
Every class you create is a subclass of another,
even if you don't declare that.
Every class in Java is a subclass of java.lang.object
implicitly, and many of the examples that I've used
in the course have used subclasses and superclasses,
but we're gonna review it formally and briefly here.
To explicitly declare class inheritance,
you use the extends keyword in the class decoration.
An example as you can see below,
You already know that a class can only extend one class.
So a class SubClass extends SuperClass.
SubClass in this example, is said to be a
SubClass of the class SuperClass.
It can also be said to be a child class or a derived class.
SuperClass is said to be a superclass,
or may also be called a base class or a parent class.
A subclass is said to be of type SuperClass
and an instance of the subclass can be used anywhere
an instance of the superclass can be used.
In other words, the subclass passes
the 'IS A' test of object oriented programming.
a subclass IS A SuperClass.
For example,
if your superclass is Dog,
and your subclass is Pug,
then it can be said that Pug is a Dog.
Any application where a dog is expected
a pug should work as well.
However, the opposite is not necessarily true.
A dog may not always be a pug.
So, a class consists of two types of elements.
These are firstly members,
and members include any fields any methods
and any nested types,
that is classes enums and interfaces.
Members of a class can be inherited by sub classes.
A class consists also of elements that are not members,
these are constructors initializer blocks
and static initializer blocks.
These are not inherited by subclasses.
Although constructors are not inherited
there is an implied call to the superclass's constructor,
if an explicit call is not made.
And I have discussed this in quite a few samples
in code in previous videos in the course.
Also, there's no way to call initializer blocks
or static initializer blocks on the superclass,
explicitly from the subclass.
The rules for inheriting class members are as follows.
Firstly, a subclass does not inherit
the private members of its parent.
A sub class inherits all the public
and protected members of its parent,
no matter what package the subclass is in.
If the subclass is in the same package as its parent,
it also inherits the package private members of the parent.
You can use the inherited members as is or replace them,
hide them or supplement them as follows.
Inherited fields can be used directly as is,
like any other fields.
They can be hidden by the subclass.
The subclass declares a field with the same name
as the one in the superclass
and in general hiding not recommended
An inherit fields can also be supplemented.
So the subclass can declare new fields
that are not in the superclass.
The inherited methods can be used directly as is,
like any other methods,
inherited methods can also be overridden.
So the subclass can declare a new instance method
that has the same signature and return type
as the one in the superclass.
inherited methods can be hidden by the subclass.
So the subclass can declare a new static method
that has the same signature as the one in the superclass.
And finally,
inherited methods can be supplemented.
So the subclass can declare new methods
in the subclass that are not in the superclass.
So it's important to note
that although we say that a subclass does not
inherit private fields of the superclass,
the object which is instantiated from the sub class type
is instantiated with the private field variables
of the superclass.
Right, so let's end the video here.
In the next one,
We'll get started with going through
some of these concepts in code.
See you in the next video.